---
title: Inside Sleuth Kit 01 - Source Code Structure
date: 2016-02-02 16:45:00
---

Since the Sleuth Kit is an open source software, we can obtain TSK's source 
codes easily. Studying the source codes can help us understand more concepts
in file system analysis. It will be a great experience to study inside the Sleuth Kit.

The source codes of TSK can be downloaded [here](https://github.com/sleuthkit/sleuthkit).

Note the release version of TSK is in the "master" branch.
The current version of TSK being developed is in the "develop" branch.
I will use the master branch to explain my discovery over TSK source codes.

The `tools` folder stores compiled programs once you follow the instruction manual
in "INSTALL.txt" at root folder. These programs are categorized into different folders
such as `fstools`, `vstools`, `hashtools`. The corresponding `*.cpp` files are also
in these folders. These files contain the **main function** of each program, making
them **good starting point** to study the codes.
<!--excerpt-->

The **tsk** folder stores most of the source codes of TSK. There are multiple subfolders
in it. Some of them are listed here:

* **docs**: Simple documentations about source codes structures.
* **base**: Source code files which define basic types, enums, macros and functions.
* **fs**,**vs**...: Store core source codes of tools.

Knowing the basic source code structure, we can easily understand the detailed
mechanism about how a specific TSK tool works. For example, the `mmls` tool can
read a dos partitioned image and list all partitions. To understand how it works,
we can start by looking at the **mmls.cpp** in 'tools/vstools' folder. Then we will
look for the **main** function to track other functions.

In the main function, a **tsk_vs_open** function is used to open the image and generate
the volume system information. Since mmls is a volume system tool, it is very likely
that this tsk_vs_open function is stored in **tsk/vs** folder. By performing a search,
we can confirm our guess by looking at **tsk/vs/mm_open.c**, where the tsk_vs_open
function is defined.

Such function tracking can continue until we find out the struct that defines master
boot record(MBR) if the image being processed is a dos partition system.
The core functions tracked during this process can be illustrated
as the following graph:

```nohighlight
mmls.cpp          main()................................
(tools/vstools/)     |
                        |
mm_open.c            tsk_vs_open()......................
(tsk/vs/)                  |
                            |
dos.c                      tsk_vs_dos_open()............
(tsk/vs/)                          |
                                    |
dos.c                              dos_load_prim_table()
(tsk/vs/)                                    |
                                                |
tsk_dos.h                                    dos_sec....
(tsk/vs/)
```
